In this chapter, we're going to be looking
at advanced uses of functions.
And in this first lesson we're going to
begin looking
at one advanced use of functions, and
that's the Recursive function.
Not so much an advanced use as it is an
advanced technique for writing functions.
So let's get started.
We're gonna call this program.
Recursive one dot p y.
We're gonna start to explain recursion by
demonstrating how
to use recursion to compute the factorial
of a number.
The first thing we have to understand is
that recursion can naturally explain how
recursion occurs.
So, what I'm gonna do, is I'm gonna
start with some comments here and give an
example.
5 factorial is equal to 5, times 4 times 3
times 2 times 1.
Another way to look at 5 factorial is to
see that it is equal to 5 times 4
factorial.
Then we can say 5 factorial is equal to 5
times 4 factorial.
Times 3 factorial and clearly this is a
recursive definition.
Let's take this last example out.
Now here we're defining recursion in terms
of itself
by saying that 5 factorial is equal to 5
times 4 factorial, which is the same thing
as
saying 5 times 4 times 3 factorial and so
on.
So clearly factorial has a recursive
definition that we can use.
And, in fact, that's the more natural way
to describe how to compute factorial.
We did it an iterative way earlier because
those were the only
tools that we understood at the time, was
how to use a loop.
To compute factorial.
So let's see in this lesson how to write
the factorial function using recursion.
So we'll begin the definition the same way
we did
before, def fact and then our parameter
will be number.
First thing we have to do is we have to
say,
if number is less than or equal to one,
return one.
Now I'm gonna come back and explain all
this in a moment.
First let's go ahead and finish the
definition, and execute the
function, then I'll come back and explain
how the recursion actually works.
So we say, if number less than or equal to
1, return 1, else, return
number times factorial number minus 1.
So this is the recursive definition right
here.
If we're saying if the number is greater
than 1, then return
the number times factorial of 1 less than
the current number.
So we start out at 5, we're going to say
return 5 times factorial 4.
So what happens is, as we build up these
returns, what we'll see is, we'll see
essentially this pattern.
We'll have a 5, and then a 4, and then a
3, and then a 2, and then a 1.
When we get to the point where we're out
of
numbers to compute, then we work backwards
and perform the multiplications.
2 times 1 is 2.
2 times 3 is 6.
6 times 4 is 24.
24 times 5 is 120, and that is the
factorial of 5.
We can demonstrate how that works by
writing print, fact, 5.
Let's Save and run the program.
We'll leave it open because we're going to
use it again.
And
we see that 5 factorial is indeed 120.
Let's try it with a different value, let's
try 10 just to do a larger one.
3 million 628 thousand and 800 is the
value of 10 factorial.
So again, to look at the definition.
The recursive step occurs right here where
we call factorial with a new input.
Just like in a for loop we have to keep
decreasing the variable in order to
eventually stop the program.
If we didn't do that then we'd run out
of memory at some point and the program
would crash.
But that's how recursion works, and what
happens is we're just delaying
the eventual computation by continually
calling
the function again with a smaller input.
So that the first time it's 5 times 4
factorial.
Then it's 5 times 4 times 3 factorial.
Then it's 5 times 4 times three times 2
factorial.
Then finally we get to 5 times four times
3 times 2 times 1 factorial, 1 factorial
is 1 that will cause the function to stop
and then the term we use is unwind.
Then we unwind all of these products to
get the eventual value of 120.
So that's how recursion works.
And with that, we're ready to move to the
next lesson, where we're going
to look at a couple more examples of using
recursion in a Python function.